My first question is if you would like to tell me a little bit about
As somebody who's come to Wales
What you thought about Wales when you first arrived here?
Yeah, I would say that I always
Wales here I never live in London
but
people always
Give me London story how things are there
other lots a lot of things
but
I've seen that Wales here
Is peaceful place and if
And they are also lovely they also love people like I will say that
No, violence is not there
The way our children go to school the way the teachers take care of them
even in the workplace
How I am my colleagues
were just
living together just
Talk together even if we will for break we sit together with each I
think
Wales here is
It's a good place and quite place and lovely and supporting
Yeah, I will say that
wheels is a
good place
because my colleagues those who are landing
some of them some of them are living in
Milton Keynes
They always give me there
how things are like I will say like
Rent here is more is
lower than
There there the rent is higher than here
It's good I'll say well, this is good
And has your relationship to well, I don't know how long you've lived in Wales
See this this year may
14 I'll be five years
So you've lived here quite a while
Five years
So does it feel different now after five years than it did on your first time?
Yeah, I will say it's different now
Especially the rent is higher
The time we arrived here
I think I was living with my S
The house we were living was
I'll say five
55 or five something
But now
The rent is higher
And you see the
Even that time that I arrived
2020-29 it was you if you take like 50 pounds or 30 pounds
Go to shopping your trolley will be full
But now
No
It's costly
And the light
Everything is higher
It's higher than the time I came
Yeah
What about when you
When you look around you
You see the
Is there anything that you see that makes you think oh that's very Welsh
Yeah
What I see that is
If I want to compare
Wales city in my country
Where I'm coming from
I will say yes
Here like everything is different
From where I'm coming from
So I think it's the plan
The leaders
Know how to just put everything nice
For the people
Yeah
So when you
Is there anything that you can describe
What it
So
When I come back
So if I'm coming from England to Wales
I go oh
The shape of the hills is different
When I come in for example
And I know that I'm in Wales for me
Is there anything like that that you
Know that you're in Wales
So you know I just came
From my country to here
So I don't know much about it
I don't know much about
Land
Or other things
I also went there
Like
For visit three days
I saw
Like the building there is different
With here but
I'm living here alone
Everything especially
The buildings
The time I came
You know
One building at the train station
Yes
It was quite nice
And
The museum I went there
It was good
I was happy about that
Just when they free
It's a free thing
If you go they don't say that come and pay this
Pay this you know
Amazing
Going to the museum
It was nice for me
Yeah
The museum is okay
Me
I would say that it was
Amazing for me
That's really interesting
Was there something in particular in the museum
That you enjoyed seeing
Or that you enjoyed
I went where
Like I would say that
The Caribbean
The time they were here
They put their pictures in the stories there
I saw the pictures
They explained things for us
Yes I was happy that
This country
To also remember
The
Caribbean
Those who came here
Begin everything their life
I was happy about that
That's really great
I'm glad that was good thank you
So
Would you feel
Comfortable
To talk about
Home
Is it okay to talk about home
What home means to you
Where I'm coming from
Both
That's interesting isn't it
When you think of home do you think where you're coming from
Do you think here or
Do you think both
Maybe both
I would just compare both
See where I'm coming from
I'm coming from
A large family
But the large family
It was just
Good
Like example if
I want to say
Me I don't like it
But the way I grew up
And met how
My fathers
Grandfathers
You know now
I think everything is changing
Marriage
Young
Is now limited
But the time back
Again
Like
15 years or 16
They will just
Call you
We want you to marry this man
You can't say no
You have to
Agree with your parents
If you say no
I will not marry this person
It's like
You are a child
That you don't respect
Your family
But that thing was
It was
Terrible it was bad
But now
I think
It's now changing
A bit
And a lot back home is
About
How the train
Children is different
In here
What I
See here is
A child
Five years, four years
A child can always speak
About his mind
But he is
Like your mother do something that you don't like
Here the child will say the mama
No, no, no, no
But back home
You can't
If an elderly person says something
You, a child will feel that
No, what they said is not
It's not the right
But you can't just
Tell your mother or your father
No
But here it seems the freedom is here
For the children
To just say what they like
Or that one
I've seen that
We are also picking
Some more, some more to see back home
If that one can help us
Because the way
They train us
The way we grow
Back home, like here
You can call my name
If you are older than me
But back home
If somebody is older than me
I can't just call your name
I can't just mention your name
No
I have to
Add some respect
Like
Elderly man
I can't just say mama
I can't just say somebody will just call me mama
Because I'm older than the person
But here, no
Even I'm older than you
I can't just call your name
Back home, no
If I meet somebody here
I have to add the respect
But here
The person will just call your name
That's why we Africans
They say
White people always say that
Everybody in Africa is our sister
It's true
The way we grow
There
A man I will just say
Or brother
A girl, a woman I will say sister
If the older man
The older one
I will just say
Mama
But here no
That's why I've seen the different
African culture
And white people
I've seen that
Even the children also see the difference
That's why I'm saying Africa
Like the children
Here in the school
They are more happy
Back home
If a child
You made a mistake
You did something wrong
In school
A teacher can cane you
A teacher can beat you
But here it's not
It's not
Maybe
But now I think
It will be changing back home too
Like you were supposed to come to school
8 o'clock
And you came 9 o'clock
Maybe the seniors can punish you
They can give you some punishment
You came late
You were supposed to be in the school
8 o'clock and why
You came late
So in school
It's different
Back home and here
Again
Can you tell me about anything
That makes you feel
Comfortable
So
You know you get home from work
And you have that kind of
I'm comfortable now
What is it that for you makes you feel comfortable
In your day
A lot
Back home
Maybe
If you are a government worker you can work
You can go home
But if you are a farmer
You can yes
From farm you work hard
You come back home you have to cook
Do everything before
You go to work
But here
If
I want to start my work
My off days I always prepare
Something I will cook
Different kind of food
Put in the fridge
So after work
If I just come I will take my bath
I will eat
And just go to bed
And rest
Either I watch African movies
Or
I will just
Sit down relax more
And go to bed that's it
So it's different
Here
Back home
And the African moon
So is that a hobby that you do
For fun is watching African cinema
Yes
Can you tell me a bit about that
About
Is there a film that you particularly love
Or
Yes but
I always say that it's always a movie
I watch
A story
A movie that I always watch is
Something that I will watch
Like a story
The way the people live
The way
Or somebody is suffering
The way it ended
And
I pick something there for myself
That's the only movie that I watch
African movies
Something that I will just watch
At the end
I know that yes
Something in the movie touch me
And I'm happy about that
That's the movies
Thank you
So
If we were to think about
I don't know how much you've had chance to think about this in advance
But if we were to think about is there a place
That's really important to you
A place
Yeah
Now or here
Or in your childhood
Or just a place
That's somewhere that you love
Or that you want to go
Or that's somewhere that you love
Yeah
I like all
I went to the beach
Twice
The first one
I went with Baozou
Somebody was doing
His birthday
So we went there
I was amazed
I was happy about the scene
How people are there
And the food that we ate
The seaside is good for me
I'm happy about this
Seaside
If I were to go there now what would I be able to see
To see
If you were to describe it to me
I don't know how to describe this
You know if you go to see
A lot of people
You went with your friends
Different kind of food
You went there
They do a
What am I going to say? Kebab
Yes
They came there with a charcoal
And everything
We roasted a lot of meat
And other things
And some came with food
We share and they
See the way it is
I don't know how to say
I like
The side
The sea side you see the breeze
The waves
It's always coming
It was
A nice view for me
So the second time
The way I went for the birthday
I was happy
So second time I just
I decided to go there and sit down
And watch the sea
And watch the waves
And everything
So I was happy
It was a nice place for me
And it's the air
The smell of it
What are you smelling in the air?
I would just say
The fresh air
Is coming
I don't know how to explain
Refreshing my mind
Oh lovely
It was good
I love the sea as well
I love to get in and swim
It's cold
But it's
Did you do any swimming when you were there?
No
I don't know how to swim so
You could paddle
Just walk in
But no I never
I always go there and sit down
Imagine the way
The creative way
I don't know how to explain it
I was
I was amazed
I'm very lucky
Although very cold
It can be very cold
Ok
A lot of people would do this
It's a nice place
Wales is a nice place
It's peaceful
Especially where I'm living now
It's quiet
Yes
If you come to work
No noise
The place is quiet
So I was
Ok
I was living in
Back there it was noisy
Quiet
Back to everywhere
Oh it's
Yes
The quiet and the calm
Very important for you
Yes
Even where I'm living
You can see
You can see everything
The sea
I always come out
Just watch
How things are
Oh lovely
There you see everything
Just everything
How beautiful
Thank you
One of the questions I wanted to ask
Which I don't know if you
Have a particular moment in mind
Is there a point you would like to tell me about
Where things changed
Was there an important change
Where
Let's think about it
As if a magical moment
Where everything got better
Or changed or was different
Where
At all
The way things
Are going
We don't know the changing
If everything
Changed it will be better
But the way it is going higher
I can't just say
I can't say
Something about that
I can't say something
About that but if not everything
Is just changing
Higher, higher, higher
If you think
Thinking about
The future
How can our children live
Or how our generation
Is going
It's just something that
Is in my mind
Thinking about that
About what will happen for future generations
Future generations
But
The way things are changing
Things are just changing
That way
I don't know how to explain that
No, no
So when you
Thinking about when your children are
Grown up and what they will be
Living in
Do you have hopes for what it will be like
For them
Do you have hopes
For what it will be like
Hope like
I don't understand that one
Do I have hope
Do you have hope or a dream
For what it will be like
What it will be like
I'm a Christian, I believe in God
So I always say that
God will change
Things, it will be better for the
Future generation
That's
The only one I'm saying
If not the way things are
Going
Sometimes I always say
God will change it, if not
If it's going to be harder, harder
I think the generation
Coming, I don't know
How they are going to
Yeah
Do you want to talk a bit about your faith
You said you're a Christian
And that's important to you
Is that something you'd like to talk
About
Are you part of a church or
Yeah
I'm a Catholic
You know
I'm a Christian
We have them different
Some are Catholics
Some are
The same
Christians that say we are following
Jesus
But
What we Catholics believe
Like
I would say
Anglican
Are not
Believing that much
Or Methodist are also
Different part
But my side
I'm a Catholic, the way I believe
If I have
Like
Something
That's telling me
Or something is warning me
What I believe
I always go to church
With my Rosary
That's my belief
I know if I go there
Sit down, do the Rosary
The Hail Mary
The time I will finish everything
Or I read
I take my Bible
Go to read somewhere
I'll be happy that
My mind is
I refresh my mind in everything
That's my belief in God
In the religion that I have
Yes
So I believe that one
Is
A strong, a Catholic
A Catholic
Rules there is a strong for me
Something that helped me
Yes
And are you part
Of a community? Are there people that
You met through?
Yes
Africans are there
So we have
African
Community
After Mass
We go together
Like we chat or we do something
That
The
The priests always
Share like a first
Month
The first month
The first week of the month
Maybe Indians are there
The white people are there
And Africans who
The father
Always made us, we meet
The first week of the month
We can prepare if Africans are coming
With something we can prepare
Some African dishes
After Mass
Everybody will go to the hall
There we enjoy
The meal together
And
We chat and go
If it is Indians, Indians will
Always come with, they are always
They are meals and everything we take
Together
And
Oh I forgot these
Different countries
I forgot that country
So it was good
That we have community there
To just meet and chat
And do everything
I just moved to
This
I'm not
In some association yet
Yes
You mentioned there about sharing
Food together
And you mentioned that a few times you talked about
On your birthday where you shared food on the beach
As well
Yeah
Is that eating together something that's important to you?
Yeah you know
Coming together
And sharing food is
Something that is good
Yes
You know each other much
Like the way I went there
Is Ebaozo
Somebody doing a birthday
It's the day that I met
A lot of Ebaozo people also came here
So we are happy
We talk together
We eat, it was good
It was good
Some came with
Rice
A lot of food different
Some came with salad
Vegetables
It was good
It was good for us
Yeah
And one lady make this
Spinach rolls
It was good
Rice and other
It was
And it's like being together with other people
Yeah
You know
Every country with their food
So it's good
To test
Is there something
That you would share?
What would you make?
No that you know
I don't know
No but is there something that you
If you were going to
What would you make if you were going to share food?
What's your favourite thing to make?
Like Africa
We have something like
We have our doughnut there
We call it back home
Boiled fruit
So it's a bread flada
You can just mix it and do it
It's round round like this
If I was
Earlier I would just do that one
I would just make that one and go
Thank you
I love that
So we've talked a lot
About my questions
What would you
Is there anything that you would like
People to know about you
And your experience of
Wales or Bowsow
Or community here?
Bowsow community
Is a good community
Bowsow is a good
Association
The way I experience
Is a good
But if not a Bowsow
If not a Bowsow
Was not there
I think now
I could have been in Africa again
So
I would like to
To talk about
What I would like to talk about
So
I'm happy about
That the way Bowsow
Always help people
I'm happy
If not
If that support is not there
I could have been in Africa
So it's good
It's a period that
I've seen everywhere
If
Somebody is
In trouble like the way I face
I always mention
Bowsow
So it's a good thing
For me
It's a good
Thing and a good experience
I joined
Bowsow the way they've trained me
The way they talk to me
I was happy
That's really great
That's it
And if we were to describe
So I think
We'll finish with
Can you tell me
If you were to say
The thing that you are
Really proud of
Is there something about yourself
That you're really proud of
And that you would like everybody to know
Yes
I'm proud of myself
I would say that
Even the English that I'm speaking
I know it's not a
Correct English
I would say that
Like
I would say
My background
Our fathers
Education, no
My father was a farmer
So
Their hope
Their mind is just
A girl education is not important
But a boy education
Is good
A girl
If you send a girl to school
If the girl grown up
Going to marry, blah, blah, blah
But now I think now
Everything changed
So my education level
Is just classics
And I dropped out
But I'm proud of myself
That I know
I can't just read much
I can read
I can also stand on my feet
And do something
Support myself
But I'm proud
That I'm working
Taking care of myself
My mother is back in Africa
I work, I always send
Money back home to take care of my mother
So I'm here working
Supporting them
So because of that I'm proud
Of myself
I'm not like
Putting my bed into somebody
That's why
I'm proud of myself for that
That's fantastic
Your English is really great
It's really good
I was saying that my English
Is not that perfect
No it's very good
Thank you
I can't speak
Any other languages
I can only speak English
I'm always impressed
When somebody can speak more than one language
I think it's
Really amazing
My children can speak two languages
I can't
They speak Welsh
And English
I can't
I will not say Wales
In this country
So I live here now
But I come from England
I came to Wales a long time ago
20 years ago
To Wales
No
30 years ago
I came to Wales
To go to university
But I grew up in England
But my children were born in Wales
Grew up speaking Welsh
That's good
But I think your English is very good
I thought maybe
No it's very good
Thank you
That's been really fascinating
To hear
Thank you so much for sharing all that